JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Fifty-one State
Department officials sign a
letter urging
the Obama administration to
abandon its policy
in Syria and carry out
airstrikes against
Syria's president.
Then, ahead of the Olympics, we
dive in to
the story behind Brazil's deadly
waters, and
how local residents are risking
it all to
fight pollution.
ALEXANDRE ANDERSON, Fisherman
(through translator):
They shot at me in front of the
fisherman's
association. Shrapnel hit my
waist, but I
knew I had to keep fighting.
Other fishermen
have been killed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze a full
week of news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraqi special
forces pushed
into the heart of Fallujah
today, for the
first time since Islamic State
fighters seized
it in early 2014.
The breakthrough came nearly a
month into
an army offensive to recapture
the city. Troops
paraded the Iraqi flag through
the city's
streets today after taking the
main government
complex. Later, the prime
minister declared
victory.
The people of Britain mourned
today for Jo
Cox, the member of parliament
who was brutally
murdered yesterday.
Rohit Kachroo of Independent
Television News
reports on the day's events.
ROHIT KACHROO: If ever there was
a moment
for unity, perhaps this was it.
Today, leaders
became just mourners, walking
through the
silent streets in the footsteps
of so many
others. They came to the place
where Jo Cox
lived and is loved to share
their sadness
one by one with flowers and then
with moving
tributes.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: Today,
our nation is rightly shocked.
And I think
it is a moment to stand back and
think about
some of the things that are so
important about
our country.
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader, Labor
Party: She was
taken from us in an act of
hatred, in a vile
act that has killed her. It's an
attack on
democracy, what happened
yesterday. It's the
will of hatred that killed her.
ROHIT KACHROO: They announced
that Parliament
will be recalled on Monday.
She is mourned as a campaigner,
but missed
most as a mother. Her husband
posted this
today, messages from the prime
minister, from
friends, from strangers told of
the impact
of her death. It's the motive
behind it, though,
that's still a mystery.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The accused
killer, Thomas
Mair, remains in custody.
Investigators are
looking into possible links to
far-right extremist
groups.
Grieving families held more
funerals today
in Orlando for the victims of
Sunday's nightclub
attack. Mourners consoled each
other at a
service for two of the 49 killed
in the mass
shooting. Also today, Orlando's
mayor announced
that a fund to help the families
has collected
$7 million.
This was also the anniversary of
the Charleston,
South Carolina, shootings. One
year ago today,
a white gunman shot nine black
parishioners
to death at the Emanuel AME
Church. Today,
Governor Nikki Haley and other
leaders joined
in a memorial service, paying
tribute to the
victims.
GOV. NIKKI HALEY (R), South
Carolina: They
taught us amazing things. We
will forever
be changed, the Mother Emanuel
12 that we
will always talk about. I don't
want it to
be talked about on an
anniversary. I will
always talk about it, whether
I'm in state
or out of state. I will always
talk about
these people who changed my
life. And I will
forever be grateful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The alleged
shooter, Dylann
Roof, is facing the death
penalty in both
state and federal trials.
In Germany, a court has
convicted a former
guard at the Auschwitz death
camp of aiding
in 170,000 murders. Reinhold
Hanning is now
94. The judge ruled today that
he was part
of the Nazi machinery behind the
Holocaust.
Survivors welcomed the decision.
HEDY BOHM, Auschwitz Survivor: I
feel that
my loved ones who were murdered
finally got
some justice, that my murdered
mother and
father now perhaps can rest in
peace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hanning was
sentenced to five
years in prison. He has
apologized, but says
that he never took part in
actual killings.
Investigators have found the
second black
box from the EgyptAir flight
that crashed
in the Mediterranean last month.
The recovery
of the cockpit voice recorder
boosts hopes
of determining the cause of the
crash. All
66 people on board died when the
plane disappeared
May 19.
A world sports body today upheld
the ban on
Russia's track and field team
for the upcoming
Summer Olympics. The
International Association
of Athletics Federations found
that Moscow
has not done enough to clean up
widespread
doping. President Vladimir Putin
denied that
his government was involved in
the doping,
and Russian officials said that
they may appeal.
And on Wall Street today, stocks
finished
the week with more losses, amid
worries that
Britain will leave the European
Union. The
Dow Jones industrial average
shed 58 points
to close at 17675. The Nasdaq
fell 44 points,
and the S&P 500 dropped six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
dozens of
State Department officials break
with President
Obama on Syria; dirty water
threatening the
Summer Olympics; the case for
Britain staying
in the E.U.; and much more.
How do you end the war in Syria?
It's a question
that has plagued world leaders
since the start
of the devastating civil
conflict there.
Today, we learned more about the
extent of
disagreement inside the U.S.
State Department
about the course set by
President Obama.
Chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret
Warner reports.
MARGARET WARNER: For five years,
the savage
Syria conflict has killed some
400,000 and
put millions more to flight.
Now 51 mid-level diplomatic
officials have
gone on record advocating a
dramatic shift
in U.S. strategy. They have
signed an internal
so-called dissent letter,
calling for targeted
military strikes against
President Bashar
al-Assad's government.
The dissenters argue it would
help bring Assad
to the negotiating table and
deal a major
blow to ISIS. The document
remains secret,
but Andrew Tabler, an expert on
Syria at the
Washington Institute for Near
East Policy,
is familiar with the document's
contents.
ANDREW TABLER, Fellow,
Washington Institute
for Near East Policy: If the
Assad regime
violates the cessation of
hostilities and
uses it to further its position
on the battlefield,
in such cases, military force
could be used.
Second, if humanitarian
assistance is not
provided or is impeded in some
way, military
force could be used.
MARGARET WARNER: In Copenhagen
today, Secretary
of State John Kerry said he had
not yet seen
the memo, but welcomed it.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: I think
it's an important statement, and
I respect
the process very, very much, and
I will probably
meet with people or have a
chance to talk
with them when we get back.
MARGARET WARNER: The memo came
through a channel
created for State Department
employees to
register policy disagreements
without retaliation.
When conflict first broke out in
2011, President
Obama called for ousting Assad.
And in 2012,
he threatened military action.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
A red line for us is, we start
seeing a whole
bunch of chemical weapons moving
around or
being utilized. That would
change my calculus.
MARGARET WARNER: But after a
regime chemical
attack killed more than 1,000
Syrians in August
2013, the president didn't
launch military
strikes, nor step up arming the
Syrian rebels.
More recently, he's launched
U.S. airstrikes
in Syria, but only against ISIS.
Instead,
Russia intervened last fall on
Assad's behalf,
bolstering him. Today, Russian
air attacks
hit anti-Assad rebels battling
is in Southern
Syria.
A spokesman for Russian
President Vladimir
Putin warned today any U.S. move
targeting
Assad's forces would plunge the
region into
total chaos.
Andrew Tabler's response?
ANDREW TABLER: If you look at
this, over time,
whether it's the United States
and the threat
of use of military force in 2013
or Israel's
continued use of strikes inside
of Syria,
this is something that the Assad
regime is
known to respond to.
MARGARET WARNER: All of this
comes as a February
cease-fire has largely
dissolved. It did let
humanitarian aid reach some
Syrian communities,
but others remain cut off by
Assad loyalists.
And peace talks backed by
Secretary of State
Kerry and the Russians have
shown no progress.
An August 1 deadline for a
political transition
won't be met. Plans now are only
to resume
talks then.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
joins me now.
So, Margaret, how unusual is
this, to have
so many diplomats weigh in like
this?
MARGARET WARNER: You put your
finger on it,
Judy. It's unprecedented in the
memory of
anyone in the history of the
State Department.
Usually, these are solo letters,
maybe three
or four. There was a little
flurry during
the Iraq War. Never have you
seen 51. And
that just shows the depth of the
frustration.
And I talked to Ambassador --
former Ambassador
to Syria Robert Ford who
actually, as you
know, two years ago resigned
publicly because
he felt he couldn't support the
policy, that
the president wasn't supporting
the opposition
sufficiently.
And he said, when you're in the
State Department,
you must follow the commander in
chief. If
you can't, you have to resign.
And he said
the grave danger for these
mid-level people
is, they're all people with
young families
with mortgages to pay, and it
can be risky,
even though the rule is no
retaliation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Margaret, how
widely held
are these views in the State
Department?
MARGARET WARNER: They are widely
held, Judy,
from the people I talk to not
only at State,
but in intelligence and defense
agencies,
which is, you have got 400,000
dead and all
these millions driven from their
home.
And whether or not we could have
done anything
about it, clearly, whatever has
been tried
has been a failure. But for some
of these
officers who are acting to try
to implement
the policy, as Fred Hof, who
used to be the
envoy to the Syrian opposition,
and he first
resigned in protest at the lack
of action,
he said -- and I thought it's
was very touching
-- he said, this gap between
belief and duty
has weighed heavily on some very
conscientious
officials, younger officials.
And by that, he meant duty to
the commander
in chief -- you're not the
elected one -- but
a belief that this whole policy
is leading
us down to more destruction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to Rio de
Janeiro, where,
late today, the regional
government declared
a state of public calamity over
a major budget
crisis.
In just seven weeks, the Summer
Olympics will
open. Among the many concerns
for athletes
competing in the Games has been
the waters
of the heavily polluted bay
where the sailing
competition will take place. But
thousands
of Brazilians' lives and
livelihoods depend
on this troubled body of water.
"NewsHour" producer Jon Gerberg
and NPR's
Lulu Garcia-Navarro bring us
this story of
their life-and-death fight to
save the bay.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Alexandre
Anderson is
a hunted man, targeted for his
work on these
treacherous waters.
Every day, as he heads out onto
Rio de Janeiro's
Guanabara Bay, he's on a mission
to defend
the bay he calls home. He tells
us its stark
beauty hides a dark reality.
ALEXANDRE ANDERSON, Fisherman
(through translator):
We hope the Olympics will show
the world another
bay. There is the bay for the
rich, for visitors
to see, and there is the bay of
the fishermen,
who are suffering. That is the
bay of excrement,
garbage, and oil. It is the
Guanabara Bay
of violence.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Alexandre
took us on
a tour of that bay. He knows it
well. He grew
up fishing here. But as the bay
got more and
more polluted, he became an
activist, who
leads a fishermen's
organization.
The ecological devastation here
is hard to
miss. He shows us a mangrove
swamp used as
an illegal dumping ground for
trash. Raw sewage
is also pumped into the bay from
communities
that have no access to
sanitation.
But for Alexandre Anderson, the
biggest polluters
are not only the residents who
lack basic
infrastructure, but also the
petroleum industry.
This is one of the biggest
refineries in the
area. And it's right on the
banks of the Guanabara
Bay.
And you can see here in the
water it's slick
with oil. Rio de Janeiro, a
world-famous beach
town, is also Brazil's oil and
gas heartland.
Energy accounted for 13 percent
of Brazil's
GDP in 2014. And almost
three-quarters of
the world's recent deep-water
oil discoveries
have been made in Brazil. The
Guanabara Bay
is the industry's hub.
Alexandre takes us to an oil
industry shipyard
and points out broken
eco-barriers meant to
stop paint and chemicals from
leaking into
the water.
ALEXANDRE ANDERSON (through
translator): All
this material contains heavy
metals. Some
are very toxic. This is an
environmental crime.
This is a company that is using
a natural
resource and polluting it. The
small quantity
of fish that we have left here
are being contaminated
or being killed.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Alexandre
points out
guards protecting the site. He's
had run-ins
with them before. We speed away.
Alexandre
spends his days documenting
these infractions
and reporting them. He says the
authorities
do little to stop what's
happening.
ALEXANDRE ANDERSON (through
translator): We
fishermen understand that the
Guanabara Bay
still has life. The Guanabara
Bay is a nursery
for many species, if only they
would stop
polluting and the government
would start acting.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: In a
statement issued
to "PBS NewsHour," the state
environmental
secretary said the problem is
that many groups
have oversight of the bay, but
they don't
have a common plan or vision for
its recovery
and preservation.
In the absence of government,
Alexandre says
the fishermen have become the
guardians of
the bay instead. Many like him
have become
vocal advocates, staging
demonstrations and
taking other actions to call
attention to
the state of the bay. Brazil's
national oil
company, Petrobras, is
responsible for at
least two major oil spills in
the bay that
severely damaged the ecosystem.
For Alexandre, speaking out
against one of
the most powerful economic
forces in the country
almost cost him his life.
ALEXANDRE ANDERSON (through
translator): They
shot at me in front of the
fisherman's association.
Shrapnel hit my waist, but I
knew I had to
keep fighting. Other fishermen
have been killed.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Brazil is
the among the
most dangerous countries in the
world to be
an environmental defender. One
of Alexandre's
colleagues was brutally
murdered, his body
tied to his fishing boat and
sunk after being
riddled with bullets.
Alexandre is in a federal
protection program
and lives in a secret location.
Up until recently,
he had a permanent security
detail. He blames
the shadowy forces protecting
the oil industry
for the violence.
The state oil company,
Petrobras, also at
the center of a massive
corruption scandal
here, released this statement to
"PBS NewsHour":
"Petrobras is unaware of these
incidents and
rejects any act of violence
against the fishermen,"
it read. "The company maintains
a dialogue
with the fishing and other
communities that
surround the Guanabara Bay.
Petrobras is also
a company that, along with other
activities,
invests in social and
environmental projects
in the Guanabara Bay. All of our
projects
rigorously follow the various
government environmental
controls and are licensed."
Prosecutors have been
investigating several
murders and disappearances of
fishermen on
the bay. A prosecutor who has
dealt with Alexandre's
case told "PBS NewsHour" he had
no proof directly
implicating the oil industry in
the deaths.
LAURO COELHO JR., Federal
Prosecutor (through
translator): It is involved in
an environmental
and economic conflict in which
there is a
clash between development and
the environment,
and in the midst of this
conflict, deaths
occurred.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: The
polluted waters,
from the oil industry, from the
raw sewage
and trash dumped into the bay,
have also hurt
the fishermen and their families
in other
ways.
Alexandre takes us to visit the
oldest fishing
community in the region in a
town called Surui.
Romildo Soares de Oliveira is
the president
of the fishermen association
here. He tells
us young people are leaving, the
community
is dying, because the bay can no
longer support
their livelihood.
Brazil promised to clean up
Guanabara Bay
for the Olympics. That could
have meant a
new start for the artisanal
fishermen who
have been plying their trade on
the bay and
its tributaries for hundreds of
years.
ROMILDO SOARES DE OLIVEIRA,
Fishermen Association
(through translator): We had
hope for the
Olympics. We end up believing in
these false
promises to clean up the bay, to
bring a better
bay for the fishermen. We were
excited, but
the end of this soap opera is
always the same.
Nothing happens.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: The water,
which they
rely on for their survival, has
been proven
to carry dangerous viruses and
bacteria with
devastating consequences.
Romildo introduced me to a group
of residents.
They have seen family members
become severely
sick and hospitalized for weeks.
Yuri Chagas,
a 14-year-old from Surui, went
swimming in
the river after he cut his foot.
It then began
to swell, and he was
hospitalized.
YURI CHAGAS, Surui Resident
(through translator):
I was a month there, urinating
with pus. They
almost had to amputate the leg,
but later
they decided it wouldn't be
necessary. I have
had to do physical therapy,
because I was
walking with crooked leg.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Some have
even died.
Antonio Batista Reis lost his
11-year-old
son 15 years ago.
ANTONIO BATISTA REIS, Brazil
(through translator):
At high tide, the kids used to
bathe in the
river. I do not know what
happened. One day,
he went to bathe and came back
with itchy
eyes. We took him to the clinic
and his eyes
began to swell. He then went to
the hospital
and died.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Reis, like
the others,
is sure that the polluted water
was the cause.
We took that assertion to
Alberto Chebabo,
head of infectious diseases at
Rio's Federal
University Hospital. He said
there is no way
to prove a direct link, but he
said ingesting
or even touching the bay's water
can result
in a number of diseases. And he
said that
children are at higher risk.
ALBERTO CHEBABO, Federal
University Hospital
(through translator): If you
look at the statistics
of hospitalization around the
bay, there is
a clear picture of the risks to
people being
exposed to this water. When you
consider this
population, especially children,
living in
these degraded areas, it is very
easy to see
the link between the bay's
environmental contamination
and these diseases.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: Back in
Surui, Antonio
Reis, a fisherman himself, says
he says he
has no choice but to continue to
work in the
waters that he believes killed
his son.
ANTONIO BATISTA REIS (through
translator):
The most majority of the people
here, about
80 percent, live from the
fishing. We have
to fish. We have to find a way.
There's no
other solution. We have to risk.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: He says the
people have
a right to clean water. But
Romildo, the president
of the fishing association,
believes nothing
will change.
ROMILDO SOARES DE OLIVEIRA
(through translator):
A lot of people talk about
athletes, about
Olympics, but lives are being
cut short here.
People do not talk about it, but
lives are
being taken.
LULU GARCIA-NAVARRO: As we head
home, Alexandre
Anderson tells us he believes
this place can
be restored. He says he has
fought for the
bay long before the Olympics,
and he will
continue long after the Games
have come and
gone.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lulu
Garcia-Navarro
of NPR in Rio de Janeiro.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks take on the
week's news;
poems marking one year after the
Charleston
church shooting; and a middle
school graduation
speech in the style of this
year's presidential
candidates.
But, first: It is less than a
week until voters
in the United Kingdom decide
whether to stay
or leave the European Union.
Campaigning was suspended for a
second straight
day today because of the
shooting death of
a lawmaker.
Last night, our economics
correspondent, Paul
Solman, explored the arguments
in favor of
Brexit, or exiting the E.U.
Tonight, he hears the case for
remaining.
It's part of his series on
Making Sense of
financial news.
MICHAEL HESELTINE, Former U.K.
Deputy Prime
Minister: This is a two-tiered
debate, hearts
and minds.
PAUL SOLMAN: At the Oxford
Debate Union last
week, the audience seemed to
side with those
in favor of the United Kingdom
remaining in
the European Union.
ALEX SALMOND, Scottish National
Party M.P.:
I have never heard the phrase
workers' rights
come out the mouth of any of the
three of
the leading protagonists.
MICHAEL HESELTINE: The man in
the desert is
sovereign, he is free, he can do
whatever
he likes, but he has no power.
We're better
together.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the remain
sentiment certainly
prevails at Mansfield College,
where I'm spending
the spring term.
LUCINDA RUMSEY, Mansfield
College: We should
definitely stay in Europe,
absolutely, unambiguously.
PAUL SOLMAN: Lucinda Rumsey
teaches old English
literature.
LUCINDA RUMSEY: We should be in
Europe, because
it's good for Europe to have us
in. And we
should be contributing. We're a
rich country,
and we should be contributing
and helping
people.
PAUL SOLMAN: But why then has
there been so
much support for leaving? Well,
one reason,
Rumsey speculates:
LUCINDA RUMSEY: Lots of English
people hate
the French, hate the Germans
since the -- kind
of since the wars, and so they
kind of come
back to that. They don't want to
be in that
club with those people. They
just don't like
them; they haven't liked them
since the 13th
century. They're not going to
like them now.
PAUL SOLMAN: But put prejudice
aside, says
Paul Flather, who runs the
Europaeum, an association
of top European universities.
The costs of
leaving, he says, are simply too
great.
PAUL FLATHER, The Europaeum:
Every single
financial economic report of the
last two
weeks have unanimously pointed
out that we
will have between 2 and 4
percent down on
growth.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because of less
trade?
PAUL FLATHER: Because of less
trade, because
of having to renegotiate
agreements and not
being able to sell things, of
tariffs, losing
markets. I think 40 percent of
our exports
go to Europe. Only 3 percent of
theirs come
to us.
PAUL SOLMAN: Economics, the key
to conservative
Prime Minister David Cameron's
case for remain.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: The
shock to our economy after
leaving Europe
would tip the country into
recession. This
could be, for the first time in
history, a
recession brought on ourselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: And what about
Mansfield's students?
ROSHAN FOROUHI, Student: I'm for
remaining.
ELLA GRODZINSKI, Student: I
think we should
remain as well.
PETER BERGAMIN, Student: Remain.
®MD-BO-LUKE CHARTERS-REID,
Student: Yes,
I think Britain should remain.
PAUL SOLMAN: Luke Charters-Reid
came to Oxford
from a low-status state school.
®MD-BO-
LUKE CHARTERS-REID: I think
pretty much all
the students I spoke to want to
stay in Europe.
I think it's better off for
students who are
thinking about the jobs for when
we leave,
and I think those jobs are more
secure if
we remain in Europe.
ELLA GRODZINSKI: The lack of
confidence people
would have of a Britain outside
of Europe
would itself cause losses in
jobs.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ella Grodzinski
says no one can
predict what would happen.
ELLA GRODZINSKI: But it seems to
me that the
predictions of what will happen
if we stay
are much more solid and grounded
than the
predictions of what will happen
if we leave.
PAUL SOLMAN: Roshan Forouhi is
more emphatic.
ROSHAN FOROUHI: The world is
going to carry
on globalizing without us. For
me personally,
I would perceive the
opportunities in the
job markets to be more
international, and
I would probably leave Britain,
whereas, if
we remain, I have a strong case
for remaining
in Britain myself.
PAUL SOLMAN: So you think that
there is a
possibility of brain drain,
essentially.?
ROSHAN FOROUHI: Absolutely. The
job markets
will shift abroad, more to the
states, more
to Germany, more to the emerging
markets in
Asia. And the prominence of
London as a financial
sector will massively decline if
we leave.
PAUL SOLMAN: But wait a second.
These kids
go to Oxford. Their futures are
assured. What
about Britons who feel their
wages, jobs and
safety are threatened by
immigration?
Peter Bergamin hails from
Canada.
PETER BERGAMIN: I think, when
times get tight,
people tend to look for easy
answers or easy
solutions. And this is exactly
what's happening
now. This is why you can see the
moves towards
these kind of populist leaders.
And they approach
things from, let's say, a
primordial, nationalistic
perspective, right?
It's all about ethnicity on some
level, Britishness
on some level, which usually
means a certain
stereotype.
PAUL FLATHER: I sense that
there's been a
failure on the part of the
governing elites.
I don't think we have explained
properly what
changes are happening in the
world and the
benefits of being in a big club,
in an international,
much more interdependent, much
more complicated
world.
PAUL SOLMAN: Paul Flather has
been a journalist,
diplomat, and professor in
England, but was
raised in India.
PAUL FLATHER: I actually came as
a migrant
on a boat through the Suez
Canal, but I'm
so British that I sometimes put,
you know,
other Brits to shame, you know,
the village
green, the sound of cricket
bats, and sunny
teas and lovely sandwiches. But
we can't pull
up the drawbridge.
BARONESS HELENA KENNEDY,
Mansfield College:
Listen, there is a kind of
fiction around
the business of sovereignty.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mansfield's head of
college,
Baroness Helena Kennedy, is also
a human rights
lawyer and a Labor party member
of the House
of Lords.
BARONESS HELENA KENNEDY: being
the sole operator,
far from giving you this
swaggering, you know,
independence and freedom,
actually makes you
low on the list of people that
nations want
to do business with. They want
to do business
with bigger blocs.
And a tiny, wee country like the
U.K. isn't
going to figure very well in all
that.
PAUL SOLMAN: But in the end,
says Kennedy,
the remain case is bigger than
just economics.
BARONESS HELENA KENNEDY: Europe
is a union
of nations, making us close
enough that we
would never think of ever
getting involved
in conflict again, about coming
together in
order to defeat things like
fascism, to coming
together to prevent the kind of
horror that
I imagine could easily happen
just now.
MICHAEL HESELTINE: So that the
self-interests
of this country, driven by
people like you,
is as important in the
generations to come
as it has been in the
generations of which
I have been privileged to be a
part.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, finally, how
did the vote
go at the Oxford Debate Union?;
227 in favor
of remaining, only 79 for
Brexit.
Next week, we will see if the
rest of the
country mirrors those results in
any way at
all.
This is economics correspondent
Paul Solman,
reporting from Oxford, England.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the moment,
polls show more
British voters are in favor of
leaving the
European Union. But the betting
markets, which
have often been more accurate,
see it differently.
There, the wagers are weighted
toward Britain
staying in.
Now to the analysis of Shields
and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome.
Gentlemen, begin by the terrible
thing that
happened last weekend in
Orlando, this 29-year-old
man with -- who had displayed
erratic behavior,
Mark, through much of his life.
Are there
any lessons from this?
MARK SHIELDS: I'm not sure there
are, Judy.
I was -- I have been amazed how
polarized
our nation is. Ordinarily and
historically,
events this tragic -- and there
have been
none really this tragic, I
guess, in just
sheer magnitude -- but there is
sort of a
uniting feeling in the country.
And that's been missing. We can
blame our
politics and our politicians.
And we will.
But it's -- I think it reflects
the country.
There's just -- we live in a
couple of different
worlds. Republicans
overwhelmingly think it's
a matter of terrorism, and
Islamic terrorism,
and that that's where all the
attention -- and
Democrats overwhelmingly respond
that it's
the availability and the
promiscuous availability
of weapons without background
checks or adequate
controls.
And so I guess the -- tragedies
like this
have historically brought out
the best in
the country, and I don't think
that's happened
this time. It definitely hasn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We think of 9/11.
MARK SHIELDS: Think of 9/11,
exactly. Think
of other times of tragedy, and
even Charleston.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David.
DAVID BROOKS: I actually take of
a cheerier
view, I think.
I thought there was an amazing
amount of simple,
unadorned grief and sympathy for
the victims
and the victims' families. And
the fact a
large percent of them were gay
wasn't as big
an issue.
That was my perception, that
people of all
sides said, these were human
beings, God's
creatures, who were killed. And
there was
an outpouring of simple grief
for the people.
On the political stuff,
obviously, the gun
thing is divisive. But I thought
most people
said, well, this is both an act
of terrorism
and a hate crime at the same
time. And it
can be both. And I think that's
what really
just struck me about the week
is, sometimes,
the divisions we have between
psychology and
politics and religion, those
divisions don't
really make sense in practice.
And we have seen this so many
times with so
many different shooters. They're
the same
personality type. You begin with
a sense of
humiliation, personal failure,
personal disappointment,
personal injury. That turns into
a sense of
grievance, that the problem is
not me, the
problem is the world.
Then that turns into sort of
moral outrage
at the evil people who are doing
this. Then
that gets weaponized by sort of
some radical
ideology that allows me to
justify the violence.
And then you walk down the line.
And they walk down these same
series of steps,
and it's just the social
isolation of young,
angry men.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But when -- your
-- to your
point, Mark, when you look at
the reaction
of the political leadership,
Donald Trump
focused on terrorism, on what he
likes to
refer to as radical Islam, very
different
from the emphasis, at least,
from President
Obama and Hillary Clinton.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, no question.
And while I agree with David and
the points
he makes, and I think they're
strong points,
Judy, I would just add that the
FBI is coming
in for some, I think, undeserved
criticism
that somehow -- this was a man
with bad thoughts,
outrageous thoughts.
We don't arrest people in this
country. We
don't incarcerate them. There is
no thought
control. And it is acts. And
there weren't
any acts, other than reportedly
his abuse
of his wife, which doesn't rise
to the level
of the FBI, and is local law
enforcement.
But you're absolutely right.
First of all,
President Obama is at his best
at times like
this. And it's a terrible thing
to say, but
he was at Charleston, he was at
Newtown, he
was after Gabby Giffords. And in
a strange
way, it brings out the best in
him.
There is a cool detachment about
Barack Obama,
sort of a remoteness emotionally
most times.
And he was -- he's so accessible
in listening
to the victims' families and the
survivors
and how much it means to them
and how genuine
they feel he is.
And I thought he had a choice to
go on the
LGBT -- there are three elements
to it's -- the
LGBT, obviously, the terrorism
and the guns.
And he thought the guns were the
most available,
where they may get some action.
And that's
what he chose to emphasize.
As far as the others, I thought
Hillary Clinton
was quite measured, very
calibrated, responsible,
and stood in stark contrast -- a
little more
hawkish than the president, and
stood in dark
contrast to Donald Trump, who
squandered what
is the one area where
Republicans have a decided
advantage, which is national
security and
sort of homeland security.
And he just -- I mean, first of
all, congratulating
himself at the outset, and then
insinuating
in innuendo that the president
was somehow
involved was beyond the pale. It
makes him
unacceptable as a national
figure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you size
up their reaction?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well,
somewhat agreement.
If I had to rank them, if one
ranks these
things, I thought Hillary
Clinton's reaction
was the best. It combined both
the gun issue,
the gay issue, but also the
Islamic radicalism
issue, if we want to use that
word. And I
give her credit for mentioning
that.
And I do think, in acts like
this, it's not
driven by religious faith, but
it's driven
and shaped by a bin Ladenist,
jihadist ideology.
And I think the president is
wrong not to
say that.
I have a quote in my column
today by Peter
Bergen, who is a friend of --
and he said,
saying Islamic terror is not
related to Islam
is like saying the Crusades are
not related
to Christianity and their view
of Jerusalem.
It is sort of a radical
politicized version
of a faith ideology. And for the
president
to say that, A, is not the
truth, but, B,
it reeks of a political
correctness which
ends up driving people to Donald
Trump.
And so I think he should use the
term. Every
other world leader uses the
term. We can all
distinguish between the few
terrorists who
are radical Islamists between --
and the tens
and hundreds of millions of
Muslims who are
peaceful, law-abiding, normal
human beings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that,
Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I disagree
with David.
I think the syllable is very
important. Radical
Islam is the defamation of a
faith, of a faith,
whereas radical Islamist, yes,
definitely,
or radical Islamism.
But that is a profound
difference. And when
you start slipping into
denigration of an
entire faith, which obviously is
the position
that Donald Trump has been
comfortable with,
an area where he's been
comfortable in, it
is not only not in the national
interest.
It is dishonest and it is
fomenting further
strife.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or the president
called it
a political talking point, this
insistence
on Trump's part that he use that
term.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. I am actually
not comfortable
with the phrase radical Islam in
part for
that reason. People who are
faithful to the
Muslim faith don't turn into
terrorists when
they become more faithful.
MARK SHIELDS: Exactly.
DAVID BROOKS: But there is sort
of ideology
sort of attached to Islam, as
there used to
be to Christianity, or as there
sometimes
still is to Christianity or
Judaism, which
is a secular political ideology
that cloaks
itself in religious garb.
And we could call it bin
Ladenism. You can
call it jihadism. But it is the
shaping ideology
that magnetizes people like this
and sets
them off on the killing sprees.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the things
that has
come out of this, very quickly,
is the move
in Congress on the part of
Democrats, Mark,
to pass some kind of legislation
on gun control.
Do you see any possibility of a
change there?
MARK SHIELDS: I think there is a
change in
mood. I don't think -- we're in
an election
year. We're four months away
from an election.
I think there is a good
development, Judy,
quite frankly, in the group
that's assembled
by Stanley McChrystal and the
Veterans Coalition
For Common Sense, Mark Kelly, to
try and bring
control, some sensible
background checks.
And I think there is where it's
going to have
to come from. I really do.
But the Democrats have an
advantage. Make
no mistake about it. If you
don't fly, you
don't buy, which is, I think, a
dangerous
position in a civil liberties
basis, because
Donald Trump in charge of a
don't-fly list
is something that should sober
every American
citizen in who he would put on
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you see it
going anywhere?
DAVID BROOKS: I don't, just
because past is
prologue. And after all the
different killings
we have had, it hasn't gone
anywhere.
Susan Collins has an attempt at
some sort
of moderated -- the senator from
Maine -- some
sort of moderated list that she
hopes some
Republicans get, Democrats get
behind, but
the prospects in the House are
slim.
And I would say, you know, I
support all this
legislation, but I'm not sure it
would be
super effective. This guy was
actually looked
into by the FBI. He actually had
checks. And
it's just very tough to predict
human behavior.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Quickly.
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, there is no
reason in
the United States for civilian
circulation
of assault weapons, none. It's
indefensible
as a product, shouldn't be
manufactured in
the United States, any more than
bazookas
should be or flamethrowers.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask you
both about Donald
Trump.
Political path ahead, David. He
was in -- having
a lot of tense words this week
with Republican
leadership with Congress, with
other Republicans
in his own party. His poll
ratings are slipping.
What do you see?
DAVID BROOKS: I see mild to mass
panic in
the Republican Party, because he
really is
sliding. We have talked about it
before in
the last few weeks.
He was even with Hillary
Clinton, and in the
last three weeks, it's just been
zoom. He's
collapsing. And he's picking
fights with the
Republicans. Any sense of buy-in
is now just
fraying. I don't know if they
are going to
do anything against him.
But to me, the significance of
this week politically
was, would the country sort of
rally around
him on sort of xenophobic or
anti-terror mood?
And the answer so far from the
polling is,
no, he didn't get any help from
this week
politically.
And, therefore, I think there is
a real hardening
against him among an awful lot
of Americans,
and his political prospects, at
least this
week, seem extremely dire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you see?
MARK SHIELDS: Judy, the stop
Trump movement,
which the death rattle sounded,
and then it
seems to come back again. The
old maxim in
politics, you don't beat
somebody with nobody.
And there is nobody. There is no
alternative.
Everybody wants an alternative
-- not everybody,
but probably a lot of
Republicans. Certainly,
those on the ballot in November
would like
to have an alternative, but
there isn't.
You put a face on that, and
there is nobody
there. So he will be the
nominee. He's got
the strong argument: I have got
more votes
than anybody in the history of
Republican
primaries.
And, obviously, they are not
going to try
and take it away from him. But
I'm reminded
of 1972, when Democrats tried to
stop George
McGovern, for the very same
reason. They thought
he was going to lose, and it
cost them seats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Last quick
points. Bernie Sanders
made a statement last night.
Let's listen
to it, a part of it quickly, and
then I want
to ask you about it.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
It is no secret that Secretary
Clinton and
I have strong disagreements on
some very,
very important issues.
It is also true that our views
are quite close
on others. I look forward in the
coming weeks
to continued discussion between
the two campaigns
to make certain that your voices
are heard
and that the Democratic Party
passes the most
progressive platform in its
history and that
Democrats actually fight for
that agenda.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do we make
of this, David?
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: It's marriage
counseling.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: The Sanders and
Clinton people,
they're coming together. They
will come together.
It has to happen in stages, so
healing can
happen. But I would be shocked
if the Democrats
weren't pretty united by the end
of the summer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just by what he
said?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: It's an
acknowledgment, not
a concession.
Bernie Sanders is indispensable
to the Democrats
and their well-being in taking
back the Senate.
He is the leader of a movement.
They need
him. He was a generational
candidate more
than an ideological candidate.
And voters
under the age of 45 are Bernie,
and Hillary
needs them. And he needs her.
And it will
be -- will only be a shotgun
marriage, but
it might not be the -- but it
will be a marriage,
believe me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we may be
watching this
at the convention.
MARK SHIELDS: Absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
and you will both be there to
talk about it
all.
MARK SHIELDS: Look forward to
it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Happy Father's
Day to both
of you.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even as the
country's attention
has been focused on Orlando for
much of the
week, today marked the
anniversary of another
mass shooting, when nine people
were killed
in Charleston, South Carolina,
at the Emanuel
AME Church, known as Mother
Emanuel.
We look back through the
thoughts and words
of two Charleston poets. They're
part of the
community that's been coping
with the tragedy
since then.
MARCUS AMAKER, Poet: That was a
crazy night.
My wife and I were watching the
news online,
and we were watching everything
unfold. There
was a whole bunch of fear,
because the shooting
happened about five or six
blocks from our
house.
MARJORY WENTWORTH, Poet Laureate
of South
Carolina: I felt like someone
had punched
me in the stomach. I physically
reacted. And
then I had to go to work. And I
work -- teach
at a college two blocks from
Mother Emanuel.
And it was a crime scene. They
hadn't caught
the killer yet.
MARCUS AMAKER: My name is Marcus
Amaker. And
I'm a Web designer, graphic
designer, videographer,
musician, and poet.
MARJORY WENTWORTH: I'm Marjory
Wentworth.
I'm the poet laureate of South
Carolina.
Music of doves ascending. Yellow
crime tape
tied to the rod-iron fence
weaves through
bouquets of flowers and wreaths
made of white
ribbons like rivers of bright
pain flowing
through the hours.
MARCUS AMAKER: Circadian
rhythms. At ground
zero of death, the voice of God
will sound
like an alarm clock waking you
up from a dream.
MARJORY WENTWORTH: The arts
community in Charleston
has been folded into the healing
process.
And that was immediate. Poetry
is -- in a
time of crisis, it is a great
way to find
the language for something that
people don't
have. And they want that
language. People
crave some way of articulating
what they're
feeling. And that's what poetry
does, I think.
MARCUS AMAKER: I think that, for
a long time,
a lot of people my age,
especially, racism
is not really this tangible
thing, but then,
when this happened at the
church, it really
became the most real thing that
we have ever
experienced.
You open your eyes and see
yourself not as
a woman or a man, but as a
spirit who had
been breathing in an illusion.
MARJORY WENTWORTH: I think, in
terms of the
larger issue in the city, the
state and the
country, you know, the flag is
down as a result
of a horrific crime, but the
conditions that
exist around that, the sort of
social justice
issues based on race, have not
changed in
our city.
One week later, the funeral
bells ring. Lines
of strangers still bring
offerings. Nine doves
tossed toward the sun. One week
later, the
funeral bells ring, while
churches in small
towns are burning. Nine doves
tossed toward
the sun, because there are no
words to sing
while churches in small towns
are burning.
A blur of white wings ascends
like music.
MARCUS AMAKER: I see an
awakening that's happened
in this city. I have been
awakened. It's not
like I didn't know that racism
was out there,
but to see it in this tangible,
real way so
close to where I live was really
a big awakening.
And, for me, it feels like the
time for small
talk is over. If we don't change
after this,
then what is going to change us?
On June 18, the voice of God
sounded like
an alarm clock and woke us up
from a nightmare.
It was the day after a massacre,
when illusion
became reality, when darkness
was a dagger
in our hearts. From this day
forward, the
voice of God sounds like an
alarm clock waking
us up from a dream. Our eyes are
now open
to the restlessness of our souls
as we confront
the relentlessness of racism. I
will not rest
until we can sleep peacefully
again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to our
"NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be
of interest to you, too.
As this graduation season comes
to a close,
we took a closer look at the
advice given
by actors, politicians and
industry leaders
to college graduates around the
country.
Here are some highlights:
J.K. SIMMONS, Actor: Take care
of yourself.
Eat your vegetables. Get some
exercise. Floss.
(LAUGHTER)
J.K. SIMMONS: Use your turn
signal. I know
that has nothing to do with
taking care of
yourself. It's just a pet peeve
of mine.
(LAUGHTER)
MATT DAMON, Actor: As the great
philosopher
Benjamin Affleck once said,
judge me by how
good my good ideas are, not by
how bad my
bad ideas are. You have got to
suit up in
your armor. You have got to get
ready to sound
like a total fool.
Not having an answer isn't
embarrassing. It's
an opportunity. Don't be afraid
to ask questions.
SHERYL SANDBERG, COO, Facebook:
I hope that
you walk without pain and you
are grateful
for each step. And when the
challenges come,
I hope you remember that deep
within you is
the ability to learn and grow.
You are not
born with a fixed amount of
resilience. It's
a muscle. You can build it up,
and then draw
on it when you need it.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Cynicism is so easy, and cynics
don't accomplish
much. As a friend of mine who
happens to be
from New Jersey, a guy named
Bruce Springsteen,
once sang...
(LAUGHTER)
BARACK OBAMA: ... they spend
their lives waiting
for a moment that just don't
come. Don't let
that be you.
STEVEN SPIELBERG, Director: I
have imagined
many possible futures in my
films, but you
will determine the actual
future. And I hope
that it's filled with justice
and peace.
And, finally, I wish you all a
true Hollywood-style
happy ending. I hope you outrun
the T-rex,
catch the criminal, and, for
your parents'
sake, maybe every now and then,
just like
E.T., go home.
(LAUGHTER)
LIN-MANUEL MIRANDA,
Lyricist/Actor: There
will be blind alleys and
one-night wonders
and soul-crushing jobs and
wakeup calls and
crises of confidence and moments
of transcendence
when you are walking down the
street and someone
will thank you for telling your
story because
it resonated with their own.
I feel so honored to be a
detail, a minor
character in the story of your
graduation
day. I feel so honored to bear
witness to
the beginning of your next
chapter. I'm painfully
aware of what's at stake. I
can't wait to
see how it turns out.
Thank you, and congratulations
to the class
of 2016.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All good advice.
And we wanted to share just one
more. Chicago
area eighth grader Jack Aiello
mixed a large
dose of humor into his
graduation address
last week. He delivered his
entire speech
using impersonations of the
leading presidential
candidates and the current
commander in chief.
Take a look.
JACK AIELLO, Student: Hello. And
congratulations.
You are now getting to hear a
speech from
the magnificent Donald Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
JACK AIELLO: And let me just
tell you that
Thomas has been such a great
school. Quite
frankly, it's been fantastic.
(LAUGHTER)
JACK AIELLO: Now, we did all the
regular sports
you would expect, like
basketball and soccer.
But we also did some unique ones
too. So,
like, on rainy days, we would go
into the
small gym and do yoga.
(LAUGHTER)
JACK AIELLO: And I am proud to
say that I
have completely mastered the
downward dog.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JACK AIELLO: Thank you,
President Obama.
I would like to start off by
thanking the
great hardworking teachers of
Thomas Middle
School.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JACK AIELLO: They have been our
champions.
They have given us the skills we
need to get
through sixth grade and through
seventh grade
and through eighth grade. And
now we're going
to take those skills and apply
them to high
school.
And, finally, to conclude this
entire graduation
speech, I would just like to say
that the
bottom line is this. As far as
schools go,
TMS is in the top one-half of
one-half of
1 percent of schools in the
entire country.
Thank you all so much, and
congratulations
to the class of 2016!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Young Jack
Aiello, I think
he's got a future.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now: Did Lou
Gehrig actually have Lou
Gehrig's disease?
A team of scientists say it's
not clear. Repetitive
head injury can result in a
syndrome that
mimics ALS.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening.
Here's a preview.
Gwen?
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Judy.
Last weekend's horrific shooting
in Orlando,
Florida, revived all sorts of
debates in Washington
and on the campaign trail. We
will wade into
the week's arguments about
terrorism, guns,
hate crimes, immigration and
what politicians
are willing to do about any of
it on the one-year
anniversary of the Charleston
church shooting.
That's tonight on "Washington
Week" -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we look
forward to seeing
it.
On tomorrow's edition of "PBS
NewsHour Weekend":
a report from Jordan, inside the
growing economy
of the world's largest Syrian
refugee camp.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.